Add readme (#1)
JGuetschow/Global_CO2_from_cement_production: README.md

# Global CO2 from Cement Production Dataset

> This repository downloads the Andrew dataset on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10008931).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This repository downloads the Andrew dataset on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/831454).
```
I replaced the DOI by the DOI for all versions.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dataset is converted to the PRIMAP2 format and provided in the csv based interchange format and the netCDF based native primap2 format. Several version of the dataset are available.

```

## Description

> This repository downloads data on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10008931).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This repository downloads data on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/831454).
```

> The downloaded dataset can then be converted into CSV (.csv file extension) or NetCDF (.nc file extension) format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The downloaded dataset can then be converted into CSV (.csv file extension) or NetCDF (.nc file extension) format. Converted data are available for the following versions:
| v231016 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10008931) |
| v230913 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/8339353) |
| v230428 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/7875557) |
| v220915 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/7081360) |
| v220516 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/6553090) |
```

Reviewer: I think it's good to have the versions that are available somewhere. And the info that you don't need to convert anything. The table is not displayed properly by github. Not sure if it will work in the README.

The data management tool [DataLad](http://docs.datalad.org/en/stable/) is used to version control the data sets.
Commands to run the scripts are executed via the pydoit package.

## DataLad datasets and how to use them  
  
This repository is a [DataLad](https://www.datalad.org/) dataset. It provides  
fine-grained data access down to the level of individual files, and allows for  
tracking future updates. In order to use this repository for data retrieval,  
[DataLad](https://www.datalad.org/) is required. It is a free and open source  
command line tool, available for all major operating systems, and builds up on  
Git and [git-annex](https://git-annex.branchable.com/) to allow sharing,  
synchronizing, and version controlling collections of large files.  

## Installation

- Install datalad according to the [DataLad handbook](https://handbook.datalad.org/en/latest/intro/installation.html). It is recommended to install globally. 

> - DataLad is based on Git. [Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git) needs to be installed to run DataLad. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think we can delete this. I suspect datalad will install git if it isn't already there (deleting the line just means one less thing for us to worry about)

- Install [Python](https://www.python.org)

> - [pydoit](https://pydoit.org/install.html)

Reviewer: Python and pydoit are only needed if you actually run the scripts. if you just want the data you don't need them (though this case is likely very rare to non-existent as the data is meant to be used in a python based tool and already publicly available for general use cases)

of the files in the dataset, but not actual *content* of the (sometimes large)  
data files.  

### Easy Access
Users who simply want to retrieve the dataset have the option to access both the
original and extracted files with
```
dataland get <filename>
```
This command will trigger a download of the files, directories, or subdatasets  
you have specified.

For example, the CSV file for the 2023/09/13 release can be downloaded with
```
datalad get extracted_data/v230913/Robbie_Andrew_Cement_Production_CO2_230913.csv 
```
### Stay up-to-date  
  
DataLad datasets can be updated. The command `datalad update` will *fetch*  
updates and store them on a different branch (by default  
`remotes/origin/master`). Running  
  
```  
datalad update --merge  
```  
  
will *pull* available updates and integrate them in one go.  
  
### Find out what has been done  
  
DataLad datasets contain their history in the ``git log``.  By running ``git  
log`` (or a tool that displays Git history) in the dataset or on specific  
files, you can find out what has been done to the dataset or to individual  
files by whom, and when.

> ## Executing the program

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Contributing

For those who wish to contribute to the repository, below we go through the key commands you will need to use. 
```

Just something to give a bit of a context so people know what the program is and what you would use it for.

#### Set up the virtual environment with doit
```
doit setup_env
```
#### <a name="download"></a>Download the version from the command line.

> This will download all files from Zenodo as they are.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will download all files from Zenodo as they are for a specific version (note this version must already be in `versions.py`, if you want to add a new version, see the section on adding a new version below).
```

```
doit download_version --version <YYMMDD>
```
#### <a name="convert"></a>Convert the data sets into CSV and NetCDF files.
```
doit read_version --version <YYMMDD>
```

## <a name="newversion"></a> How to add a new version

To add a new version go to **versions.py** in the **src** directory and create a new value in the

> dictionary. Fill all the required information similar to the previous entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`versions` dictionary. Fill all the required information similar to the previous entries.
```

For example, the value _v230913_ in the _versions_ dictionary describes the 13-Sep-2023 release.
````python
versions = {
    "v230913": {
        'date': '13-Sep-2023',
        'ver_str_long': 'version 230913',
        'ver_str_short': '230913',
        "folder": "v230913",
        "transpose": False,
        "filename": "0. GCP-CEM.csv",
        'ref': '10.5281/zenodo.8339353',
        'ref2': '10.5194/essd-11-1675-2019',
        'title': 'Global CO2 emissions from cement production',
        'institution': "CICERO - Center for International Climate Research",
        'filter_keep': {},
        'filter_remove': {},
        'contact': "johannes.guetschow@climate-resource.com",
        'comment': ("Published by Robbie Andrew, converted to PRIMAP2 format by "
                    "Johannes Gütschow"),
        'unit': 'kt * CO2 / year',
        'country_code': True,
    },
}
````

> Then run the two commands `read_version` and `download_version` as described in **Executing the program**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then run the two commands `read_version` and `download_version` as described in ****. 
```

Update name

Reviewer: Do you mean to replace **Executing the program** by nothing?

    interchange format.
  - **read_version_datalad.py** calls datalad to run the data reading function.
  - **version.py** is a dictionary that contains metadata for each release. This file should be updated when [adding a new version](#a-namenewversiona-how-to-add-a-new-version) 
- **dodo.py** defines pydoit commands.
- **pyproject.toml** configuration file
- **requirements.txt** requirements
- **requirements_dev.txt** development requirements
- **setup.cfg** requirements
- **setup.py** installs python packages

### Make sure to correctly set up the DataLad siblings
Git repositories can configure clones of a dataset as _remotes_ in order to fetch, pull, or push from and to them. A `datalad sibling` is the equivalent of a git clone that is configured as a remote. 

**Query information** about about all known siblings with
```
datalad siblings
```

**Add a sibling** to allow pushing to github
```
datalad siblings add --dataset . --name <name> --url git@github.com:JGuetschow/Global_CO2_from_cement_production.git
```
SSH-access is needed to run this command. Note that _name_ can be freely chosen. 

**Push to the github repository**
```
datalad push --to <name>

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```

### Issues
There always issues open regarding coding, some of them easy to resolve, some harder.

### Your ideas
Contributing is ouf course not limited to the categories above. I you have ideas for improvements just open an issue or a discussion page to discuss you idea with the community.

### Technical HowTo for contributors
As we have a datalad repository using github and gin the process of contributing code and data is a bit different from 
pure git repositories. As the data is only stored on gin, the gin repository is the source to start 
from. As gin currently has a problem with forks (the annexed data is not 
forked) we have to use branches for development and, thus, to contribute you

> first need to contact the maintainers to get write access to the repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
first need to contact the maintainers to get write access to the gin repository.
```

You have to clone the repository using ssh to be able to push to it. 
For that you first need to store your public ssh key on the gin server 
(settings -> SSH Keys). 

### Instructions for merge requests
Once you have everything set up you can create a new branch branch and work there. 
When you're done create a pull request to integrate your work into the main 

> branch. This should be done first github to allow for discussions and review. Afterwards the changes 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
branch. This should be done first on github to allow for discussions and review (gin servers don't have the same review features). Afterwards the changes 
```

> can be implemented on gin. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be actually merged on gin (so that the annex is merged properly too). 
```

# Global CO2 from Cement Production Dataset

This repository downloads the Andrew dataset on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/831454).
The dataset is converted to the PRIMAP2 format and provided in the csv based interchange format and the netCDF based native primap2 format. Several version of the dataset are available.

> test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Description

This repository downloads data on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/831454).

> The downloaded dataset can then be converted into CSV (.csv file extension) or NetCDF (.nc file extension) format. Converted data are available for the following versions:
> | v231016 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10008931) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The downloaded dataset can then be converted into CSV (.csv file extension) or NetCDF (.nc file extension) format. Converted data are available for the following versions:

| v231016 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10008931) |
```

# Global CO2 from Cement Production Dataset

> This repository downloads the Andrew dataset on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/831454).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This repository downloads the Andrews dataset on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/831454).
```

I think surname is Andrews not Andrew (confusingly, Andrews is their surname not first name)

> The dataset is converted to the PRIMAP2 format and provided in the csv based interchange format and the netCDF based native primap2 format. Several version of the dataset are available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The dataset is converted to the PRIMAP2 format and provided in both the csv-based interchange format and the netCDF-based native primap2 format. Several version of the dataset are available within this repository.
```

## Description

This repository downloads data on global CO2 emissions from cement production from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/831454).
The downloaded dataset can then be converted into CSV (.csv file extension) or NetCDF (.nc file extension) format. Converted data are available for the following versions:

| v231016 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10008931) |
| v230913 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/8339353) |
| v230428 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/7875557) |
| v220915 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/7081360) |

> | v220516 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/6553090) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- | v231016 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10008931) |
- | v230913 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/8339353) |
- | v230428 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/7875557) |
- | v220915 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/7081360) |
- | v220516 |[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/6553090) |

```

If you put a hyphen at the start then this will show as dot points which is a bit nicer to read

The data management tool [DataLad](http://docs.datalad.org/en/stable/) is used to version control the data sets.

> Commands to run the scripts are executed via the pydoit package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Commands to manage the data are executed via the [pydoit](https://pydoit.org/) package.
```

## DataLad datasets and how to use them  
  
This repository is a [DataLad](https://www.datalad.org/) dataset. It provides  
fine-grained data access down to the level of individual files, and allows for  
tracking future updates. In order to use this repository for data retrieval,  
[DataLad](https://www.datalad.org/) is required. It is a free and open source  

> command line tool, available for all major operating systems, and builds up on  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
command line tool, available for all major operating systems, and builds upon  
```

Git and [git-annex](https://git-annex.branchable.com/) to allow sharing,  

> synchronizing, and version controlling collections of large files.  

Reviewer 2: Out of curiosity, did this come out of `datalad readme` or did you write this? Very good either way

Author: That's datalad readme

Reviewer 2: Nice

## Installation

> - Install datalad according to the [DataLad handbook](https://handbook.datalad.org/en/latest/intro/installation.html). It is recommended to install globally. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Install datalad according to the [DataLad handbook](https://handbook.datalad.org/en/latest/intro/installation.html). We recommend installing datalad globally as managing it from within the venv is not something we do for you.
```

- Install [Python](https://www.python.org)

> - [pydoit](https://pydoit.org/install.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Install [pydoit](https://pydoit.org/install.html). Like with datalad, we recommend installing pydoit globally as managing it from within the venv is not something we do for you.
```

> Note that for [simply downloading the dataset,](#1-easy-access) Python and pydoit are not required.

Reviewer 2: Maybe move this up to the start of this section so people don't accidentally install that stuff before they get to this point

## Getting Started

### Clone the repository

> A DataLad dataset can be `cloned` by running  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A DataLad dataset can be `cloned` by running  

```

new lines before code blocks are a convention (don't ask me why)

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
```

adding sh after ``` makes the code render a bit nicer in most viewers and also tells the user what language this code is in (in this case it's just basic shell commands)

Author: Good to know, thanks :)

datalad clone
```

> Do not use **git clone** to download the repository! This way DataLad will not have the necessary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Do not use git clone to download the repository! If you use plain git clone, DataLad will not have the necessary
```

New line after code block is convention.

Language changes make things a bit clearer I think

> information to run the program. Once a dataset is cloned, it is a light-weight directory on your local machine.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
information to manage the dataset. Once the repository is cloned, it is like using a standard light-weight repository on your local machine.  
```

Unless this is auto-generated from datalad and I am using the wrong language...?

Author: Yes this is auto-generated. I agree that "manage dataset" describes better what DataLad actually does than  "run program". For "directory" and "repository" I don't really know what the difference is. A quick Google search says: "A directory is a location in a file system, like /bin. A repository is typically a bunch of version controlled files." So repository would be the better description.

> At this point, it contains only small metadata and information on the identity  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point, the repository contains only small metadata and information on the identity  
```

> of the files in the dataset, but not actual *content* of the (sometimes large)  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the files in the dataset, but not the actual *content* of the (sometimes large)  
```

> data files.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
files.  
```

<h3 id="1-easy-access"> Easy access </h3>
Users who simply want to retrieve the dataset have the option to access both the
original and extracted files with

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
```

As above

dataland get <filename>
```

> This command will trigger a download of the files, directories, or subdatasets  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This command will trigger a download of the files, directories, or subdatasets  
```

As above

you have specified.

> For example, the CSV file for the 2023/09/13 release can be downloaded with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the CSV file for the 2023/09/13 release can be downloaded with

```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
```

datalad get extracted_data/v230913/Robbie_Andrew_Cement_Production_CO2_230913.csv 
```

> ### Stay up-to-date  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Stay up-to-date  
```

  
DataLad datasets can be updated. The command `datalad update` will *fetch*  

> updates and store them on a different branch (by default  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
updates and store them on a different branch to the one you're currently working on (by default  
```

If I understand correctly?

Author: I guess so. This is taken from the automatically generated README by DataLad

`remotes/origin/master`). Running  
  
```  
datalad update --merge  
```  
  

> will *pull* available updates and integrate them in one go.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will *fetch* available updates and integrate them in one go.  
```

Typically pull = fetch + merge so I think fetch is the right word here

  
### Find out what has been done  
  

> DataLad datasets contain their history in the ``git log``.  By running ``git  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DataLad datasets contain their history in the `git log`.  By running `git  
```

Single back-ticks for code in markdown (double back-ticks are for rst)

Author: What's rst?

> log`` (or a tool that displays Git history) in the dataset or on specific  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
log` (or a tool that displays Git history) in the dataset or on specific  
```

files, you can find out what has been done to the dataset or to individual  
files by whom, and when.

<h2 id="2-contributing"> Contributing </h2>

For those who wish to contribute to the repository, below we go through the key commands you will need to use. 

> #### Set up the virtual environment with doit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Set up the virtual environment with doit

```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
```

doit setup_env
```

> #### <a name="download"></a>Download the version from the command line.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

#### <a name="download"></a>Download the version from the command line.
```

> This will download all files from Zenodo as they are for a specific version (note this version must already be in `versions.py`, if you want to add a new version, see the section on adding a new version below).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will download all files from Zenodo as they are for a specific version (note this version must already be in `versions.py`, if you want to add a new version, see the section on adding a new version below).

```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
```

doit download_version --version <YYMMDD>

> ```

Reviewer 2: Let's add an example below here to show the format exactly e.g. 

```sh
doit download_version --version v220916
```

> #### <a name="convert"></a>Convert the data sets into CSV and NetCDF files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

#### <a name="convert"></a>Convert the data sets into CSV and NetCDF files.
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```sh
```

doit read_version --version <YYMMDD>
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Add example here

## <a name="newversion"></a> How to add a new version

> To add a new version go to **versions.py** in the **src** directory and create a new value in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To add a new version go to `src/versions.py` in the `src` directory and create a new value in the
```

Convention is to use back-ticks around filenames and directories so they render as code rather than bold

`versions` dictionary. Fill all the required information similar to the previous entries.

> For example, the value _v230913_ in the _versions_ dictionary describes the 13-Sep-2023 release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the value for key `"v230913"` in the `versions` dictionary describes the 13-Sep-2023 release.
```

````python
versions = {
    "v230913": {
        'date': '13-Sep-2023',
        'ver_str_long': 'version 230913',
        'ver_str_short': '230913',
        "folder": "v230913",
        "transpose": False,
        "filename": "0. GCP-CEM.csv",
        'ref': '10.5281/zenodo.8339353',
        'ref2': '10.5194/essd-11-1675-2019',
        'title': 'Global CO2 emissions from cement production',
        'institution': "CICERO - Center for International Climate Research",
        'filter_keep': {},
        'filter_remove': {},
        'contact': "johannes.guetschow@climate-resource.com",
        'comment': ("Published by Robbie Andrew, converted to PRIMAP2 format by "
                    "Johannes Gütschow"),
        'unit': 'kt * CO2 / year',
        'country_code': True,
    },
}
````

> Then run the two commands `read_version` and `download_version` as described in [Contributing](#2-contributing). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Then run the two commands, `read_version` and `download_version` as described in [Contributing](#2-contributing) for your newly added version. 
```

> ## Help

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Help

```

Just convention to have newline after header (not super important)

Show all doit commands

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```sh
```

doit help

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```

See a list with possible doit commands specific to this repository

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```sh
```

doit list
```

Get help on a specific command

```
doit help <command>
```

> ## Contributing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Already have contributing heading above so can delete here

### Repository structure

> - **.datalad/** contains config file for datalad

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `.datalad/` contains config file for datalad
```

Same for all lines below so these elements appear code-like rather than bold

> - **downloaded_data/** contains original data from Zenodo.
> - **extracted_data/** contains data in .csv and .nc format
> - **literature/** contains link to publication by Robbie M. Andrew. Can be downloaded with _datalad get_ command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `downloaded_data/` contains original data from Zenodo.
- `extracted_data/` contains data in .csv and .nc format
- `literature/` contains link to publication by Robbie M. Andrew. Can be downloaded with _datalad get_ command
```

etc. for the rest of this section

- **src/** 
  - **download_version.py** downloads files from zenodo for a given version. The version to read will be taken from the command line using _argparse_.
  - **download_version_datalad.py** calls datalad to run the data reading function.
  - **helper_functions.py** contains a function to map country codes.
  - **read_version.py** reads the data for a given version and saves to [PRIMAP2](https://primap2.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) native and
    interchange format.
  - **read_version_datalad.py** calls datalad to run the data reading function.
  - **version.py** is a dictionary that contains metadata for each release. This file should be updated when [adding a new version](#a-namenewversiona-how-to-add-a-new-version) 
- **dodo.py** defines pydoit commands.
- **pyproject.toml** configuration file
- **requirements.txt** requirements
- **requirements_dev.txt** development requirements
- **setup.cfg** requirements
- **setup.py** installs python packages

> ### Make sure to correctly set up the DataLad siblings
> Git repositories can configure clones of a dataset as _remotes_ in order to fetch, pull, or push from and to them. A `datalad sibling` is the equivalent of a git clone that is configured as a remote. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Make sure to correctly set up the DataLad siblings

Git repositories can configure clones of a dataset as remotes in order to fetch, pull, or push from and to them. A `datalad sibling` is the equivalent of a git clone that is configured as a remote. 
```

Is this how datalad describes siblings? The language seemed a bit odd to me but maybe this is the best description

Author: Yes that's datalad's description. I don't really know how to describe it differently. Took it from here: https://handbook.datalad.org/en/latest/basics/101-121-siblings.html#

> **Query information** about about all known siblings with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Query information** about about all known siblings with

```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
```

datalad siblings
```

**Add a sibling** to allow pushing to github

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```sh
```

datalad siblings add --dataset . --name <name> --url git@github.com:JGuetschow/Global_CO2_from_cement_production.git
```

> SSH-access is needed to run this command. Note that _name_ can be freely chosen. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

SSH-access is needed to run this command. Note that `name` can be freely chosen (we tend to just use "github" for GitHub siblings) 
```

> **Push to the github repository**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Push to the github repository**

```

```
datalad push --to <name>
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

where `name` should match the name you used above
```

> ### Issues

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Issues

```

There always issues open regarding coding, some of them easy to resolve, some harder.

> ### Your ideas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Your ideas

```

> Contributing is ouf course not limited to the categories above. I you have ideas for improvements just open an issue or a discussion page to discuss you idea with the community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contributing is ouf course not limited to the categories above. If you have ideas for improvements just open an issue or a discussion page to discuss your idea with the community.
```

> ### Technical HowTo for contributors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Technical HowTo for contributors

```

> As we have a datalad repository using github and gin the process of contributing code and data is a bit different from 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we have a datalad repository using github and gin, the process of contributing code and data is a bit different from 
```

pure git repositories. As the data is only stored on gin, the gin repository is the source to start 
from. As gin currently has a problem with forks (the annexed data is not 
forked) we have to use branches for development and, thus, to contribute you
first need to contact the maintainers to get write access to the gin repository.
You have to clone the repository using ssh to be able to push to it. 
For that you first need to store your public ssh key on the gin server 
(settings -> SSH Keys). 

> ### Instructions for merge requests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Instructions for merge requests

```

Once you have everything set up you can create a new branch branch and work there. 

> When you're done create a pull request to integrate your work into the main 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you're done, create a pull request to integrate your work into the main 
```
